# Why Simplistic Fan Controllers Don't Work Well
A simple formula that makes fan speed adjustments only based on current temperature changes makes fan speed computations completely dependent on a single data point. When the latest temperature sample is wildly different from the previous, this causes extreme fluctuations in fan speeds one way or the other. While such systems can be effective at cooling devices rapidly, they tend to promote a high level of [volatility](pid-explained.md#volatility).

Fan speeds that change rapidly up and down present several challenges to the overall goal of keeping data storage device temperatures in a comfortable range. From an ambient device temperature standpoint, when input temperatures change rapidly for any reason, it tends to exacerbate over or undershooting the target temperature.

For the end user, fan noise may be a particularly problematic facet of simple real-time models. Fan noise tends to experience frequent and sudden bursts higher or lower. The behavior of simple models often leads to a sine wave or rollercoaster pattern to the fan activity as the system is constantly reacting to the most recent stimulus. A device warms up, fans ramp up and brings its temperature down, fan speed reduces, then temperature heats up, fan speeds ramp up, temps cool, etc. over and over. The fan controller is essentially in a constant pattern of overreaction in one direction or the other. This is not a desirable experience for most people, especially in a home lab setting.
