# iDRAC: Dell's All-in-One Solution 
iDRAC is Dell's proprietary solution to remote server management. It effectively fulfills many roles simultaneously, and is more than a server management platform. Essentially, it *IS* the BMC. iDRAC is a combination of a BMC + server management firmware + server management protocol. iDRAC is not just a BMC equivalent. It is more than that. iDRAC is one of the most comprehensive server management solutions on the market. Users who are new to the 'Dell way' of server management and perhaps accustomed to utilizing IPMI or similar tools are often confused when first attempting to familiarize themselves with iDRAC's nuances. iDRAC is comprised of two (2) distinct, but related components: a hardware controller (the iDRAC device) and the iDRAC firmware (the software platform). This makes it unusual. As it is both a hardware controller and a software-based firmware, use of the term "iDRAC" may refer to either, though under most conversational circumstances the term refers to the firmware (software).

iDRAC provides sysadmins with both low and high level controls, and is intended to be a one-stop-shop for comprehensive server management. It is the conduit through which both local (direct connect or "in-band") and remote (virtual or "out-of-band") connections to a server's hardware devices are routed. Dell claims it offers a substantial benefit to enterprise corporations by promising a simpler methdodology around the management of hundreds or thousands of servers from a single end point, though home lab users re-purposing off-lease hardware may find many of its capabilities overbearing or introducing unnecessary bloat.

## iDRAC and IPMI
Since the iDRAC controller takes the place of a traditional BMC chip, this means it is necessary for iDRAC to understand side-band or out-of-band protocols, such as IPMI. This is both an advantage and disadvantage for iDRAC, depending on one's perspective. As it is effectively its own BMC equivalent, Dell is able to bake-in whatever functionality it chooses.

Currently, all iDRAC implementations support IPMI and most versions from iDRAC 8 onward also support the [Redfish API](/documentation/redfish.md). However, not all commands are supported. iDRAC acts as a gatekeeper for protocols other than its own. Requests via IPMI and Redfish are filtered by the iDRAC firmware.

### iDRAC User Interface versus IPMI
The iDRAC firmware (software) is a self-contained server management tool capable of providing a greater level of monitoring detail and control over many aspects of server maintenance, relative to IPMI or other 3rd party tools. iDRAC's firmware implementation includes both a CLI (Command Line Interface) option (similar to most IPMI tools), and a GUI (Graphical User Interface) option that runs in a web browser. All available server management features available to the end user are accessible via the iDRAC user interfaces.

IPMI is defaulted off from the factory and must be explicitly enabled via a software switch found in the iDRAC firmware. Even when available, iDRAC's support of IPMI is relatively restrictive. Beginning in the late 2010's, Dell began locking down which types of IPMI commands are allowed. The primary reason for this was a desire by Dell to lock down certain features with the intent to prevent purposeful or accidental tampering by system administrators. From Dell's perspective, such actions may inadvertently void a warranty on the server, and/or make the diagnosis of server failure more ambiguous. Other factors - primarily security related - pertain to controlling the *when, how,* and *what* is installed or running on a given server. These potentially adverse controls are discussed in more detail in the article [Dell Server Versions to Avoid](/documentation/manufacturers/dell/dell-servers-to-avoid.md).
